How does authentication work in single page applications, that's an important question. For non-single
page applications,
it works just as you learned it in all these traditional web development courses,
you have a session which you manage with the server,
nothing special here,
not really related to vue then.
However if we have a single page application powered entirely by vue, it becomes important to understand
how authentication works.
We still have a server and a client where our single application runs, the browser,
now let's say a user logs in or signs up, we send that information let's say for a login to the server
and there, we check if it's correct,
if we do find a user with that password in our database. If that's the case, we send back some information
and traditionally, this would have been a session.
Now in single page application, we work with restful APIs that are stateless, that don't care about connected
clients and that therefore don't manage sessions,
so instead of a session, we receive a token now. The token then is stored on the server and the token
essentially is a very long string which can be decoded to a javascript object with some information about
the user
and well the validity of the token, when it expires and so on. The token also is generated in a way
that the server can always verify if it was created by him,
so if the token was created on the server or if you're trying to fake a token,
so that is not possible.
So we then store this token on the browser, on the frontend
for example in the browsers local storage through the local storage API,
this has nothing to do with vuejs, local storage is something we can simply access in the browser.
And if we ever then request some data on the server from an API endpoint that actually requires us to
be logged in,
we simply send our request and we attach the token to it, so that we always have this token which we
can't fake, which can be validated on the server as an identification criteria
we can pass on with our requests.
Now this token which we store on the frontend is always only valid for a short amount of time
for security issues, though be aware that stealing it also isn't that trivial since local storage can
only be accessed from javascript and vuejs prevents cross-site scripting attacks by default
but again token is only valid for a limited amount of time and this token then is what allows us to authenticate
the user.
Now we're going to see all these things in action of course in this module,
this is how it works in theory.
Now with that, let's dive in and let's make sure that we can actually authenticate a user.